draft v21.1.0-alpha.2 release notes (#9531)
cockroachdb/docs: releases/v21.1.0-alpha.2.md

- Added support for running [`IMPORT`](../v21.1/import.html) in a mixed-version cluster. [#57382][#57382] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- Introduced `SHOW REGIONS FROM ALL DATABASES`, which shows region metadata for each database in the table. [#57500][#57500] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- Added `collations` table to the `information_schema`. The `collations` table contains the collations available in the current database. [#57609][#57609] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- Added `collation_character_set_applicability` table to the `information_schema`. [#57609][#57609] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- `LOCALITY` directives on [`CREATE TABLE`](../v21.1/create-table.html) are now persisted onto the database. [#57513][#57513] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- Multi-region defined table localities now display on the [`SHOW CREATE TABLE`](../v21.1/show-create.html) command. [#57513][#57513] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- Arrays in `pg_catalog` tables now are diaplayed in a format that matches PostgreSQL. [#56980][#56980] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

> - The "local" option to `SET TRACING` was removed. [#57567][#57567] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [`SET TRACING`](../v21.1/set-vars.html#set-tracing) `local` option (to only trace messages issued by the local node) was removed. [#57567][#57567] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
```

- Implemented [builtin](../v21.1/functions-and-operators#built-in-functions) function `levenshtein`. [#56843][#56843] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- Added table-view dependency information in `pg_depend` to improve compatibility with PostgreSQL. [#57240][#57240] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- The cluster event logging system has been modernized. In particular, the schema of the entries for the `info` column in `system.eventlog` has been stabilized. [#57737][#57737] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- The `targetID` and `reportingID` columns in `system.eventlog` are now deprecated. Their values, for relevant event types, can be found as fields inside the `info` column instead. [#57737][#57737] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- Added the `soundex()` and `difference()` [builtin](../v21.1/functions-and-operators#built-in-functions) functions. [#57615][#57615] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- New [`EXPLAIN ANALYZE (DISTSQL)`](../v21.1/explain-analyze.html) output format. [`EXPLAIN ANALYZE (DISTSQL)`](../v21.1/explain-analyze.html) now only works as a top-level statement (it can no longer be part of a bigger query). [#57804][#57804] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

> - Added a new [builtin](../v21.1/functions-and-operators#built-in-functions) method to calculate oriented envelope. [#57697][#57697] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added [builtin](../v21.1/functions-and-operators#built-in-functions) function `st_orientedenvelope` to calculate the mimimum-area rotated rectangle. [#57697][#57697] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
```

- The DB Console URL printed by [`cockroach demo`](../v21.1/cockroach-demo.html) now automatically logs in the user when pasted into a web browser. [#56740][#56740] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- The URLs generated when [`cockroach demo`](../v21.1/cockroach-demo.html) starts have been made shorter and easier to copy/paste by shortening the generated password. [#58305][#58305] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- When using the JSON output formats for log entries, the server identifiers are now reported as part of each payload once known (either cluster ID + node ID in single-tenant or KV servers, or tenant ID + SQL instance ID in multi-tenant SQL servers). [#58128][#58128] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
- Fixed [`cockroach demo --global`](../v21.1/cockroach-demo.html) from crashing with `didn't get expected magic bytes header`. [#58466][#58466] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

> - Previously, for certain log files CockroachDB would both flush individual writes (i.e., propagate them from within the `cockroach` process to the OS) and also synchronize writes (i.e., ask the OS to confirm the log data was written to disk). The per-write synchronization part was unnecessary and, in fact, found to be possibly detrimental to performance and operating cost, so it was removed. Meanwhile, the log data continues to be flushed as previously, and CockroachDB also periodically (every 30s) request synchronization, also as previously. [#58995][#58995] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Previously, for certain log files, CockroachDB would both flush individual writes (i.e. propagate them from within the `cockroach` process to the OS) and also synchronize writes (i.e. ask the OS to confirm the log data was written to disk). Per-write synchronization was found to be unnecessary and possibly detrimental to performance and operating cost, so it was removed. Now, the log data continues to be flushed, as before, and CockroachDB only requests synchronization periodically (every 30s). [#58995][#58995] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
```

- The parameter `sync-writes` for file sink configurations has been removed. (This is not a backward-incompatible change because the configuration feature is new in v21.1.) [#58995][#58995] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

> - The parameter `buffered-writes` for file sink configurations has been added. It is set to `true` (writes are buffered) by default; and set to `false` (i.e., avoid buffering and flush every log entry) when the `auditable` flag is requested. [#58995][#58995] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The parameter `buffered-writes` for file sink configurations has been added. It is set to `true` (writes are buffered) by default and set to `false` (i.e. avoid buffering and flush every log entry) when the `auditable` flag is requested. [#58995][#58995] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
```

### API endpoint changes

- The notable event `create_statistics` is only reported when the [cluster setting](../v21.1/cluster-settings.html) `sql.stats.post_events.enabled` is enabled. This fact is now also reported in the [event log reference documentation](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/blob/master/docs/generated/eventlog.md). [#57877][#57877] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

> - The `Timestamp` field of structured notable events is now numeric, and encodes a number of nanoseconds since the unix epoch. [#58070][#58070] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `Timestamp` field of structured notable events is now numeric, and encodes a number of nanoseconds since the Unix epoch. [#58070][#58070] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
```

- The Health API now checks that the SQL server is ready to accept clients when a readiness check is requested. [#59350][#59350] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

### DB Console changes

- Minor style changes to represent new branding palette. [#57130][#57130]

> - Changed default per-page value on [Transactions page](../v21.1/ui-transactions-page.html) to 20; minor style updates. [#57824][#57824]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Changed the default per-page value on the [Transactions page](../v21.1/ui-transactions-page.html) to 20; minor style updates. [#57824][#57824]
```

- Added a timeseries graph indicating statement denials due to feature flags on the [SQL Dashboard](../v21.1/ui-sql-dashboard.html) of DB Console. [#57533][#57533] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

> - Updated labels on [Hardware Dashboard](../v21.1/ui-hardware-dashboard.html) to be more accurate. [#57224][#57224]
> - Link back to [Statements page](../v21.1/ui-statements-page.html) from [Statement Details page](../v21.1/ui-statements-page.html#statement-details-page) will always link to the Statements list instead of invoking "back" action on the browser. [#57975][#57975]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Updated labels on the [Hardware Dashboard](../v21.1/ui-hardware-dashboard.html) to be more accurate. [#57224][#57224]
- Updated the link back to [Statements](../v21.1/ui-statements-page.html) from [Statement Details](../v21.1/ui-statements-page.html#statement-details-page) so that it will always link to the Statements list instead of invoking the "back" action on the browser. [#57975][#57975]
```

> - On the [Sessions page](../v21.1/ui-sessions-page.html), any `age` label has been replaced with `duration` and `txn` has been replaced with `transaction`. The actual metrics remain unchanged. [#58616][#58616] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- On the [Sessions page](../v21.1/ui-sessions-page.html), every `age` label has been replaced with `duration` and every `txn` label has been replaced with `transaction`. The actual metrics remain unchanged. [#58616][#58616] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
```

- Renamed the `CPUs` metric column to `vCPUs` in the Node List on the [Cluster Overview page](../v21.1/ui-cluster-overview-page.html). [#58495][#58495] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

> - Added Open SQL Transactions to [SQL Dashboard](../v21.1/ui-sql-dashboard.html) and renamed `SQL Queries` to `SQL Statements`. Removed references to "Distributed SQL Queries" when metrics really are discussing all SQL queries. [#57477][#57477] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added Open SQL Transactions to the [SQL Dashboard](../v21.1/ui-sql-dashboard.html) and renamed `SQL Queries` to `SQL Statements`. Removed references to "Distributed SQL Queries" when metrics really are discussing all SQL queries. [#57477][#57477] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
```

### Bug fixes

- Fixed a bug in [`RESTORE`](../v21.1/restore.html) where some unusual range boundaries in interleaved tables caused an error. [#58219][#58219]

> - Previously, CockroachDB would encounter an internal error when performing `JSONB - String` operation via the [vectorized execution engine](../v21.1/vectorized-execution.html). This has been fixed. The bug was introduced in v20.2.0. [#57349][#57349]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Previously, CockroachDB would encounter an internal error when performing a `JSONB - String` operation via the [vectorized execution engine](../v21.1/vectorized-execution.html). This has been fixed. The bug was introduced in v20.2.0. [#57349][#57349]
```

> - In rare situations, an automated replication change could result in a loss of quorum. This would require down nodes and a simultaneous change in the replication factor. Note that a change in the replication factor can occur automatically if the cluster is comprised of fewer than five available nodes. Experimentally the likelihood of encountering this issue, even under contrived conditions, was small. [#56735][#56735]

Reviewer: > This would require down nodes and a simultaneous change in the replication factor.

I'm not sure what the intent is, but I believe this needs an edit.

- Fixed an internal error when using aggregates and window functions in an `ORDER BY` for a `UNION` or `VALUES` clause. [#57498][#57498]
- `DROP TYPE` and certain other statements that work over SQL scalar types now properly support type names containing special characters. [#57354][#57354]

> - Fixed a performance regression introduced in v20.2 to reading virtual tables which introspect the schema. [#57542][#57542]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a performance regression introduced in v20.2 affecting reads of virtual tables which introspect the schema. [#57542][#57542]
```
@ajwerner Would this rephrasing still be accurate?

- `sum_int` aggregate function is now evaluated more efficiently in a distributed setting. [#58345][#58345]
- [`INSERT ... ON CONFLICT ... DO NOTHING`](..v21.1/insert.html) statements now use anti-joins for detecting conflicts. This simplifies the query plan for these statements, which may result in more efficient execution. [#58679][#58679]
- Improved the accuracy of histogram calculations for the following types: `string`/`uuid`/`inet` family. Additionally, support for `time`/`timetz` histogram calculations was also added. This improves optimizer's estimates and results in better query plans in certain instances. [#55797][#55797]
- The optimizer now uses collected histogram statistics to better estimate the cost of JSON and ARRAY inverted index scans, which may lead to more efficient query plans. [#59326][#59326]

### Build changes

> - CockroachDB now builds on Ubuntu 20.10 and other distos using `gcc-10`. [#58895][#58895] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CockroachDB now builds on Ubuntu 20.10 and other distros using `gcc-10`. [#58895][#58895] {% comment %}doc{% endcomment %}
```

### Doc updates

- The types of logging sinks available through configuration are now [automatically documented](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/blob/master/docs/generated/logsinks.md). [#59083][#59083]
- The various output formats available for logging configurations are now documented. See the generated [reference documentation](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/blob/master/docs/generated/logformats.md) for details. [#58075][#58075]

> - The cluster event logging system has been standardized. A [reference documentation](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/blob/master/docs/generated/eventlog.md) is now available (auto-generated from source code); changes to non-reserved payloads will now be announced at least one release version in advance. The event types are organized into broad categories: SQL Logical Schema Changes, SQL Privilege Changes, SQL User Management, CLuster-level events and SQL Miscellaneous operations. [#57737][#57737]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The cluster event logging system has been standardized. [Reference documentation](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/blob/master/docs/generated/eventlog.md) is now available (auto-generated from source code); changes to non-reserved payloads will now be announced at least one release version in advance. The event types are organized into broad categories: SQL Logical Schema Changes, SQL Privilege Changes, SQL User Management, CLuster-level events and SQL Miscellaneous operations. [#57737][#57737]
```
